# Toeholder-microRNAs-for-CRC

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is an umbrella term encompassing cancers originating in the
colon or rectum and is the third most common form of cancer in the world with a very high
disease burden, but may be treated effectively if detected early. CRC is characterised by certain circulating microRNA (miRNA) biomarkers in the bloodstream, namely miR-203a-3p, miR-145-5p, miR-375-3p and miR-200c-3p. These miRNA targets can be detected with high specificity by carefully designed toehold switches, which quantify the target molecules via fluorescence. In this study, we use the Toeholder 2.0 software to model toehold switches for each miRNA target and analyse the biophysical properties of the switch-target complexes to identify the optimal switch for each target. We evaluate the viability of these switches and find promising candidate switches for miR-203a, miR-200c and miR-375-3p for further development and implementation in paper-based diagnostic devices for CRC. However, we rejected the switch for miR-145 due to its low specificity. Based on these results, for a patient to be diagnosed with CRC, they must have a significant increase in miR-203a concentration and significant decrease in miR-375-3p and miR-200c-3p concentrations in blood serum. These results can be implemented in paper-based diagnostic devices, allowing for the development of affordable, stable, minimally-invasive and point-of-care diagnostic devices for CRC.

I used Toeholder, NUPACK and BLAST+ to design molecular sensors called "toehold switches" that can bind to and detect the presence of colorectal cancer microRNAs. This project was conducted over 6 weeks at the Research Science Institute (RSI) 2022 hosted at MIT under Dr Elizabeth Wood and Dr Matt Cain (JURA Bio) and presented at the RSI symposium.
